# What is an API?

## Introduction
An API, or Application Programming Interface, is a way for different software applications to communicate with each other. Think of it as a translator that helps two different systems understand each other. One application could be written in one language and the other application written in a different language - an API allows them to communicate with a common language, or protocol, most commonly HTTP - the Hypertext Transfer Protocol.

While HTTP was initially developed for transferring web pages it has become a general medium transfer protocol. Other protocols have been developed which are more efficient over the wire (air) like gRPC.

APIs are a common integration pattern for large enterprises where multiple teams are working on different pieces of software that will need to communicate with each other. This approach allows different teams to focus on different parts of a larger system, then come together to agree the interface, or contract, that will allow the parts to communicate.

**_NOTE:_**  There are other integration pattern such as EDI (Electronic Data Interchange), messaging, event passing and others.

## Everyday Examples
Imagine you are at a restaurant. You (the user) look at the menu (the application) and decide what you want. You then tell the waiter (the API) your order. The waiter takes your order to the kitchen (the server), where the food is prepared. Finally, the waiter brings your food back to you. In this analogy:
- **You** are the user.
- **The menu** is the application.
- **The waiter** is the API.
- **The kitchen** is the server.

## Why Are APIs Important?
APIs make it easier for developers to build software by allowing different systems to work together. For example, when you use an app to check the weather, the app uses an API to get the latest weather data from a weather service.

## Considerations
There are some additional consideration to take into account when developing APIs:

### Hosting

### Performance

### Security 
By definition, APIs open up your software to communication from outside its own boundary. This introduces complexity especially when it comes to security. I mentioned HTTP above but to add an extra layer of security you should secure the API endpoint with TLS (Transport Layer Security) which requires a certificate.

Will you let just anyone call your API or do you want some form of authentication in place?

### Version Control
It's important to have good version control over your APIs. Imagine you are developing an API for others to consume and one day you decide to make a change that means the contract is no longer valid. If you had thousands of clients calling your API, they could all cease to function correctly causing issues of stability, reputational damage and potentially cost (if the API is monetised).

### Discoverability
How do others know your API exists? And how do they know which authentication mechanism to use? Larger organisations will typically have some form of API catalogue where teams can publish their API contracts and details about how to use the API.

## Conclusion
APIs are essential tools in modern software development. They allow different applications to communicate and share data, making it easier to create complex systems.
